prep release: v1.29.0 (#3734)
apollographql/router: CHANGELOG.md

This project adheres to [Semantic Versioning v2.0.0](https://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html).

# [1.29.0] - 2023-09-04

## 🚀 Features

### GraphOS Enterprise: Authorization ([PR #3397](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/3397), [PR #3662](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/3662))

> ⚠️ This is an [Enterprise feature](https://www.apollographql.com/blog/platform/evaluating-apollo-router-understanding-free-and-open-vs-commercial-features/) of the Apollo Router. It requires an organization with a [GraphOS Enterprise plan](https://www.apollographql.com/pricing/).

If your organization doesn't currently have an Enterprise plan, you can test out this functionality by signing up for a free [Enterprise trial](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/graphos/org/plans/#enterprise-trials).
We introduce two new directives, `@requiresScopes` and `@authenticated`, that define authorization policies for fields and types in the supergraph schema.

They are defined as follows:

> ```graphql
> scalar federation__Scope
> directive @requiresScopes(scopes: [[federation__Scope!]!]!) on OBJECT | FIELD_DEFINITION | INTERFACE | SCALAR | ENUM
> 

Author: ```suggestion
```graphql
scalar federation__Scope
directive @requiresScopes(scopes: [[federation__Scope!]!]!) on OBJECT | FIELD_DEFINITION | INTERFACE | SCALAR | ENUM
```

This directive allows granular access control through user-defined scopes.

```graphql
directive @authenticated on OBJECT | FIELD_DEFINITION | INTERFACE | SCALAR | ENUM
```

This directive allows access to the annotated field or type for authenticated requests only.
```

This project adheres to [Semantic Versioning v2.0.0](https://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html).

# [1.29.0] - 2023-09-04

## 🚀 Features

### GraphOS Enterprise: Authorization ([PR #3397](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/3397), [PR #3662](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/3662))

> ⚠️ This is an [Enterprise feature](https://www.apollographql.com/blog/platform/evaluating-apollo-router-understanding-free-and-open-vs-commercial-features/) of the Apollo Router. It requires an organization with a [GraphOS Enterprise plan](https://www.apollographql.com/pricing/).

If your organization doesn't currently have an Enterprise plan, you can test out this functionality by signing up for a free [Enterprise trial](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/graphos/org/plans/#enterprise-trials).
We introduce two new directives, `@requiresScopes` and `@authenticated`, that define authorization policies for fields and types in the supergraph schema.

They are defined as follows:

> ```graphql
> scalar federation__Scope
> directive @requiresScopes(scopes: [[federation__Scope!]!]!) on OBJECT | FIELD_DEFINITION | INTERFACE | SCALAR | ENUM
> 
> This directive allows granular access control through user-defined scopes.
> 
> directive @authenticated on OBJECT | FIELD_DEFINITION | INTERFACE | SCALAR | ENUM
> 
> This directive allows access to the annotated field or type for authenticated requests only.

Author: ```suggestion
```graphql
scalar federation__Scope
directive @requiresScopes(scopes: [[federation__Scope!]!]!) on OBJECT | FIELD_DEFINITION | INTERFACE | SCALAR | ENUM
```

This directive allows granular access control through user-defined scopes.

```graphql
directive @authenticated on OBJECT | FIELD_DEFINITION | INTERFACE | SCALAR | ENUM
```

This directive allows access to the annotated field or type for authenticated requests only.

This project adheres to [Semantic Versioning v2.0.0](https://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html).

# [1.29.0] - 2023-09-04

## 🚀 Features

### GraphOS Enterprise: Authorization ([PR #3397](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/3397), [PR #3662](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/3662))

> ⚠️ This is an [Enterprise feature](https://www.apollographql.com/blog/platform/evaluating-apollo-router-understanding-free-and-open-vs-commercial-features/) of the Apollo Router. It requires an organization with a [GraphOS Enterprise plan](https://www.apollographql.com/pricing/).

If your organization doesn't currently have an Enterprise plan, you can test out this functionality by signing up for a free [Enterprise trial](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/graphos/org/plans/#enterprise-trials).

> We introduce two new directives, `@requiresScopes` and `@authenticated`, that define authorization policies for fields and types in the supergraph schema.

Author: ```suggestion
We introduce two new directives, `@requiresScopes` and `@authenticated`, that define authorization policies for fields and types in the supergraph schema, composed with Federation version 2.5.3 or higher.
```

They are defined as follows:

```graphql
scalar federation__Scope
directive @requiresScopes(scopes: [[federation__Scope!]!]!) on OBJECT | FIELD_DEFINITION | INTERFACE | SCALAR | ENUM
```

This directive allows granular access control through user-defined scopes.

```graphql
directive @authenticated on OBJECT | FIELD_DEFINITION | INTERFACE | SCALAR | ENUM
```

This directive allows access to the annotated field or type for authenticated requests only.
For more information on how to use these directives, please read Apollo Router [docs](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/router/configuration/authorization)
```

By [@Geal](https://github.com/Geal) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/3397 https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/3662

## 🐛 Fixes

### Update Deno to resolve Rust Docs generation failure ([Issue #3305](https://github.com/apollographql/router/issues/3305))

We've updated to the latest version of Deno (0.200) to fix errors when generating [docs.rs/apollo-router](https://docs.rs/crate/apollo-router/latest).

By [@o0Ignition0o](https://github.com/o0Ignition0o) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/3626

> ### Fix config metrics for subscription callbacks ([Issue #3687](https://github.com/apollographql/router/issues/3687))
> 
> Detection of subscription callbacks has been fixed for internal Apollo metrics. This has no user facing impact.
> 
> By [@BrynCooke](https://github.com/BrynCooke) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/3688
> 

Reviewer: No user-impact

```suggestion
```

### GraphQL response processing is now captured under the execution span ([PR #3732](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/3732))

> This ensures that the response processing is captured under the "execution" span.  Previously, any event in processing would be reported under the supergraph span or — even more arbitrarily — any plugin's span (e.g., Rhai) which was happening in between.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Ensure processing is captured under the "execution" span.  Previously, events would be reported under the supergraph span or — even more arbitrarily — any plugin's span (e.g., Rhai).
```

By [@Geal](https://github.com/Geal) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/3732

## 🛠 Maintenance

### Apollo Uplink connections re-use the existing HTTP client ([Issue #3333](https://github.com/apollographql/router/issues/3333))

A single HTTP client will now be shared between requests of the same type when making requests to [Apollo Uplink](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/federation/managed-federation/uplink/) to fetch supergraphs, licenses and configuration from Studio.  Previously, such requests created a new HTTP client on each periodic fetch which occasionally resulted in CPU spikes, especially on macOS.

By [@BrynCooke](https://github.com/BrynCooke) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/3703

### Remove unneeded schema parsing steps ([PR #3547](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/3547))

> We need access to a parsed schema in various parts of the router, sometimes before the point where it is actually parsed and integrated with the rest of the configuration, so it was parsed multiple times to mitigate that. Some architecture changes made these parsing steps obsolete so they were removed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Access to a parsed schema is required in various parts of the Router. Previously were were parsing the schema multiple times, but this is now fixed.
```

- In a supergraph plugin, we calculate the authorization status and put it in the request context:
    - for `@requiresScopes`, this is the intersection of the query's required scopes and the scopes provided in the request token
    - for `@authenticated`, it is `is_authenticated` or not
- In the query planning phase, we filter the query to remove unauthorized fields before proceeding with query planning.
- At the subgraph level, if query deduplication is active, the authorization status is used to group queries together.
- At the execution service level, the response is first formatted according to the filtered query, which removed any unauthorized information, then to the shape of the original query, which propagates nulls as needed.
- At the execution service level, errors are added to the response indicating which fields were removed because they were not authorized.

By [@Geal](https://github.com/Geal) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/3397 https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/3662

## 🐛 Fixes

### Update Deno to resolve Rust Docs generation failure ([Issue #3305](https://github.com/apollographql/router/issues/3305))

> The documentation for our [`apollo-router` Crate on Crates.io](https://crates.io/crates/apollo-router), was failing to build because of a dependency's complication errors [in the docs.rs build environment](https://docs.rs/about/builds). 
> 
> We've updated to the latest version of Deno (0.200) which has resolved this constraint and allows us to generate our [docs.rs/apollo-router](https://docs.rs/crate/apollo-router/latest) docs once again.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We've updated to the latest version of Deno (0.200) to fix errors when generating [docs.rs/apollo-router](https://docs.rs/crate/apollo-router/latest).
```

By [@o0Ignition0o](https://github.com/o0Ignition0o) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/3626

> ### Fix config metrics path and test for subscription callbacks ([Issue #3687](https://github.com/apollographql/router/issues/3687))

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Fix config metrics for subscription callbacks ([Issue #3687](https://github.com/apollographql/router/issues/3687))
```

Detection of subscription callbacks has been fixed for internal Apollo metrics. This has no user facing impact.

By [@BrynCooke](https://github.com/BrynCooke) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/3688

> 

Reviewer: If there is no user-facing impact, should we even include this?

This project adheres to [Semantic Versioning v2.0.0](https://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html).

# [1.29.0] - 2023-09-04

## 🚀 Features

> ### GraphOS Enterprise: authorization directives ([PR #3397](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/3397), [PR #3662](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/3662))
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### GraphOS Enterprise: Authorization ([PR #3397](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/3397), [PR #3662](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/3662))

> ⚠️ This is an [Enterprise feature](https://www.apollographql.com/blog/platform/evaluating-apollo-router-understanding-free-and-open-vs-commercial-features/) of the Apollo Router. It requires an organization with a [GraphOS Enterprise plan](https://www.apollographql.com/pricing/).

If your organization doesn't currently have an Enterprise plan, you can test out this functionality by signing up for a free [Enterprise trial](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/graphos/org/plans/#enterprise-trials).
```

We introduce two new directives, `@requiresScopes` and `@authenticated`, that define authorization policies for fields and types in the supergraph schema.

They are defined as follows:

```graphql
scalar federation__Scope
directive @requiresScopes(scopes: [[federation__Scope!]!]!) on OBJECT | FIELD_DEFINITION | INTERFACE | SCALAR | ENUM

This directive allows granular access control through user-defined scopes.

directive @authenticated on OBJECT | FIELD_DEFINITION | INTERFACE | SCALAR | ENUM

This directive allows access to the annotated field or type for authenticated requests only.

For more information on how to use these directives, please read Apollo Router [docs](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/router/configuration/authorization)
```

> The implementation hooks into the request lifecycle at multiple steps:
> - In query analysis, we extract the list of scopes necessary to authorize the query.
> - In a supergraph plugin, we calculate the authorization status and put it in the request context:
>     - for `@requiresScopes`, this is the intersection of the query's required scopes and the scopes provided in the request token
>     - for `@authenticated`, it is `is_authenticated` or not
> - In the query planning phase, we filter the query to remove unauthorized fields before proceeding with query planning.
> - At the subgraph level, if query deduplication is active, the authorization status is used to group queries together.
> - At the execution service level, the response is first formatted according to the filtered query, which removed any unauthorized information, then to the shape of the original query, which propagates nulls as needed.
> - At the execution service level, errors are added to the response indicating which fields were removed because they were not authorized.

Author: ```suggestion
```

This project adheres to [Semantic Versioning v2.0.0](https://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html).

# [1.29.0] - 2023-09-04

## 🚀 Features

### GraphOS Enterprise: authorization directives ([PR #3397](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/3397), [PR #3662](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/3662))

We introduce two new directives, `requiresScopes` and `@authenticated`, that define authorization policies for fields and types in the supergraph schema.

They are defined as follows:

```graphql
scalar federation__Scope
directive @requiresScopes(scopes: [[federation__Scope!]!]!) on OBJECT | FIELD_DEFINITION | INTERFACE | SCALAR | ENUM

> directive @authenticated on OBJECT | FIELD_DEFINITION | INTERFACE | SCALAR | ENUM

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
directive @authenticated on OBJECT | FIELD_DEFINITION | INTERFACE | SCALAR | ENUM

This directive allows access to the annotated field or type for authenticated requests only.

For more information on how to use these directives, please read Apollo Router [docs](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/router/configuration/authorization)
```

```

The implementation hooks into the request lifecycle at multiple steps:
- In query analysis, we extract the list of scopes necessary to authorize the query.
- In a supergraph plugin, we calculate the authorization status and put it in the request context:
    - for `@requiresScopes`, this is the intersection of the query's required scopes and the scopes provided in the request token

>     - for `@authenticated`, it is `is_authenticated` or not

Reviewer 3: Where does `is_authenticated` come from? Do we want to simply it by saying
- for `@authenticated`, it is the boolean value representing the user's authentication status

Author: right, that's an internal detail

- In the query planning phase, we filter the query to remove unauthorized fields before proceeding with query planning.
- At the subgraph level, if query deduplication is active, the authorization status is used to group queries together.
- At the execution service level, the response is first formatted according to the filtered query, which removed any unauthorized information, then to the shape of the original query, which propagates nulls as needed.
- At the execution service level, errors are added to the response indicating which fields were removed because they were not authorized.

By [@Geal](https://github.com/Geal) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/3397 https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/3662

## 🐛 Fixes

> ### Update deno, so we can generate docs again ([Issue #3305](https://github.com/apollographql/router/issues/3305))
> 
> Router docs failed to build on crates.io because of a documentation compile error in Deno.
> This updates Deno to the latest version, which allows us to generate crates.io documentation again.
> 
> By [@o0Ignition0o](https://github.com/o0Ignition0o) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/3626
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Update Deno to resolve Rust Docs generation failure ([Issue #3305](https://github.com/apollographql/router/issues/3305))

The documentation for our [`apollo-router` Crate on Crates.io](https://crates.io/crates/apollo-router), was failing to build because of a dependency's complication errors [in the docs.rs build environment](https://docs.rs/about/builds). 

We've updated to the latest version of Deno which has resolved this constraint and allows us to generate our [docs.rs/apollo-router](https://docs.rs/crate/apollo-router/latest) docs once again.

By [@o0Ignition0o](https://github.com/o0Ignition0o) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/3626

```

### Fix config metrics path and test for subscription callbacks ([Issue #3687](https://github.com/apollographql/router/issues/3687))

Detection of subscription callbacks has been fixed for internal Apollo metrics. This has no user facing impact.

By [@BrynCooke](https://github.com/BrynCooke) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/3688

### GraphQL response processing must happen under the execution span ([PR #3732](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/3732))

> Previously, any event in processing would be reported under the supergraph span, or any plugin span (like rhai) happening in between

Author: ```suggestion
Previously, any event in response processing, like formatting, would be reported under the supergraph span, or any plugin span (like rhai) happening in between. It is now correctly reported under the execution span. The only span that moves because of this is the `format_response` span, at the debug level
```

By [@Geal](https://github.com/Geal) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/3732

## 🛠 Maintenance

> ### Uplink connections now reuse reqwest client ([Issue #3333](https://github.com/apollographql/router/issues/3333))

Author: ```suggestion
### Uplink connections now reuse their reqwest client ([Issue #3333](https://github.com/apollographql/router/issues/3333))
```

> ### Uplink connections now reuse reqwest client ([Issue #3333](https://github.com/apollographql/router/issues/3333))
> 
> Previously uplink requests created a new reqwest client each time, this may cause CPU spikes especially on OSX.
> A single client will now be shared between requests of the same type. 
> 
> By [@BrynCooke](https://github.com/BrynCooke) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/3703

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Uplink connections now reuse reqwest client ([Issue #3333](https://github.com/apollographql/router/issues/3333))

A single HTTP client will now be shared between requests of the same type when making requests to [Apollo Uplink](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/federation/managed-federation/uplink/) to fetch supergraphs, licenses and configuration from Studio.  Previously, such requests created a new HTTP client on each periodic fetch which occasionally resulted in CPU spikes, especially on macOS.

By [@BrynCooke](https://github.com/BrynCooke) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/3703
```

Author: could you reapply this suggestion? I changed the title line just before that, can't apply the change now

Reviewer: done https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/3734/files#r1314932660

> ### Add a metric tracking authorization usage ([PR #3660](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/3660))
> 
> The new metric is a counter called `apollo.router.operations.authorization` and contains the following boolean attributes:
> - `filtered`: the query has one or more filtered fields 
> - `requires_scopes`: the query uses fields or types tagged with the `@requiresScopes` directive
> - `authenticated`: the query uses fields or types tagged with the `@authenticated` directive
> 
> By [@Geal](https://github.com/Geal) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/3660
> 

Reviewer: I think this reflects an additive change during the feature development of authorization, but in terms of this release, authorization is net-new, so it makes less sense to call this "maintenance" out separately here.

I would suggest we could just remove it.

```suggestion
```

    - for `@authenticated`, it is `is_authenticated` or not
- In the query planning phase, we filter the query to remove unauthorized fields before proceeding with query planning.
- At the subgraph level, if query deduplication is active, the authorization status is used to group queries together.
- At the execution service level, the response is first formatted according to the filtered query, which removed any unauthorized information, then to the shape of the original query, which propagates nulls as needed.
- At the execution service level, errors are added to the response indicating which fields were removed because they were not authorized.

By [@Geal](https://github.com/Geal) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/3397 https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/3662

## 🐛 Fixes

### Update Deno to resolve Rust Docs generation failure ([Issue #3305](https://github.com/apollographql/router/issues/3305))

The documentation for our [`apollo-router` Crate on Crates.io](https://crates.io/crates/apollo-router), was failing to build because of a dependency's complication errors [in the docs.rs build environment](https://docs.rs/about/builds). 

> We've updated to the latest version of Deno which has resolved this constraint and allows us to generate our [docs.rs/apollo-router](https://docs.rs/crate/apollo-router/latest) docs once again.

Author: ```suggestion
We've updated to the latest version of Deno (0.200) which has resolved this constraint and allows us to generate our [docs.rs/apollo-router](https://docs.rs/crate/apollo-router/latest) docs once again.
```

By [@o0Ignition0o](https://github.com/o0Ignition0o) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/3626

### Fix config metrics path and test for subscription callbacks ([Issue #3687](https://github.com/apollographql/router/issues/3687))

Detection of subscription callbacks has been fixed for internal Apollo metrics. This has no user facing impact.

By [@BrynCooke](https://github.com/BrynCooke) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/3688

### GraphQL response processing is now captured under the execution span ([PR #3732](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/3732))

This ensures that the response processing is captured under the "execution" span.  Previously, any event in processing would be reported under the supergraph span or — even more arbitrarily — any plugin's span (e.g., Rhai) which was happening in between.

By [@Geal](https://github.com/Geal) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/3732

## 🛠 Maintenance

> ### Uplink connections now reuse their reqwest client ([Issue #3333](https://github.com/apollographql/router/issues/3333))
> 
> Previously uplink requests created a new reqwest client each time, this may cause CPU spikes especially on OSX.
> A single client will now be shared between requests of the same type. 
> 
> By [@BrynCooke](https://github.com/BrynCooke) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/3703

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Apollo Uplink connections re-use the existing HTTP client ([Issue #3333](https://github.com/apollographql/router/issues/3333))

A single HTTP client will now be shared between requests of the same type when making requests to [Apollo Uplink](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/federation/managed-federation/uplink/) to fetch supergraphs, licenses and configuration from Studio.  Previously, such requests created a new HTTP client on each periodic fetch which occasionally resulted in CPU spikes, especially on macOS.

By [@BrynCooke](https://github.com/BrynCooke) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/3703
```
